Okay, so to work with the DOM API,
we can select elements from the DOM.
This is probably the,
if you have ever seen a JavaScript course,
or if you have ever read a book, or
even a blog post on JavaScript,
you have seen this basic part.
You can select an element By its ID,
the famous document get element by ID,
we'll get there.
By Class Name, so when you want to pick
an element from the DOM you can pick them
By ID, and for that you need an ID,
remember the ID in HTML is not mandatory.
So if you don't set an ID of an element,
you can't get an element By ID.
By Class Name,
in this case it's the class declaration.
By Name, this is the name HTML attribute
that most of the time we use only for
forms, but actually you can use
it on other element as well.
Means not common, but some library or
some patterns will let you use that.
By CSS Selector that is currently
today the most famous one,
I mean, you picking element
by using a CSS Selector
that matches that particular elements or
a group of elements.
Or By Navigating the DOM Structure, so
instead of looking into the the HTML
itself you can navigate the structure
because it's a tree structure.
We have parents, have children, okay,
and we can navigate that structure.
Yeah, it's a lot of work sometimes,
but sometimes it's better,
it depends on the case.
When selecting elements,
like I wanna get the IMG,
I wanna get the link,
when selecting these elements,
some functions will return one element and
only one element.
The element typically
extends from HTMLElement.
It can be A Live HTML Element Collection,
and the class, I mean,
the type that we receive is
an instance of HTMLCollection.
Live means that, for example,
if you're looping through those elements,
and also at the same time you have
another code that is changing the DOM,
it will change your collection on the fly.
I mean, you're getting all the elements
with the class important and you're
making a loop, for, looping through all
the elements with class equals important.
While you are looping a new HTMLElement
appears in the DOM with class important.
Well, you are changing
the collection that you're looping.
But some other functions will
return a Static Element Collection,
it's like a frozen at that moment.
And in this case,
it's called a NodeList, so
it's a different interface,
okay, a NodeList.
So it depends on the function that you're
using, you can receive a NodeList or
an HTMLCollection and the API is
available there is not the same, okay?
So to get one element, typically today,
we use getElementByID if it has an ID or
querySelector.
There other ways, like first child in
case you are navigating through the DOM.
But the most common are getElementByID and
querySelector.
getElementByID is from the first
version of DOM, by the way,
the DOM API has different versions.
At this point, it doesn't matter, I mean,
in the W3C, we have different specs, okay?
getElementByID is not exactly for
the original one, but
from the 90s anyway,
getElementByID is from the 90s.
querySelector is more modern has probably
today 15 years, something like that.
querySelector will let you get the first
element matching a CSS Selector.
So if you say h1, it will take the first
h1, if you have more than one,
just the first one,
it will return one element.
Have in mind, when you use these
functions that are returning one element,
you can always get null in
case no node was found.
So you're getting an elementByID and
the ID does not exist in the HTML,
you get null, okay, makes sense?
So here you have an example,
this is a very basic JavaScript
like JavaScript 101 with a DOM.
So you create a variable element
document.getElementById,
you pass an Id as a string.
And, so,
have in mind that element can be null,
in case it doesn't exist
in the current DOM, okay?
If it's querySelector, you pass
a CSS Selector such as in this case
you will find, the first element
matching that selector it's a link
that's within a header,
that is a direct descendant of a section.
And then you can deal with that element,
you can change the contents,
read the contents,
add attributes, and so on.
To get multiple elements so
if you wanna get the collection
of elements there are many
ways getElementsByTagName,
getElementsByClassName, querySelectorAll,
and getElementsByName.
This is not the full list,
it's probably the most common ones.
And from this list
querySelectorAll is the only one
giving you on a static collection, okay?
And be in library static for
most situations Hegel argue that,
it's not going to make a big
difference for most use cases.
But we have a big difference, okay,
you will see that in a second.
When you use functions returning multiple
elements, if there are no elements
you won't get no, you will get
an empty array or an empty collection.
And when I say array because sometimes
it's not really an array, okay,
but it has an array like interface anyway,
on every situation.
So for example,
here I'm using querySelectorAll,
that receives also a CSS Selector,
but it's always returns a collection.
In this case, it's given me
the list items of an ID nav-menu,
okay, that's all,
it will give me a collection.
This is a live collection,
getElementsByClassName,
document.getElementsByClassName("importan-
t"); in this case,
it will look for
elements with the important class.
Here comes the weird part mostly
if you are coming from React or
Angular or Vue where we are used to
use the latest version of ECMAScript.
So HTMLCollections, so
the ones that are live,
they don't have all the modern
Array interface, for example,
filter, map, reduce,
forEach, we don't have that.
So we are using getElementsByClassName
you cannot use filter or forEach.
The only one from this list that
let us do that is querySelectorAll.
So if you make a querySelectorAll,
even if you are passing a class name,
so it will be similar to
getElementsByClassName, but
that collection will have filter, map,
reduce, forEach, okay, makes sense?
You can still wrap your live collection,
and have those methods,
if you wrap them in
an array using Array from.
So you pass Array from you pass the
documents getElementsByName collection,
and then you can filter that
is a little hacky, okay?
But if you're used to functional
programming in JavaScript and you'll see
how that works is I'm gonna work with
getElementsByTagName initially, okay?
So you need to wrap it into Array.from,
char actually, for example,
you will filter, make sense?
That's because originally
with the DOM API was created,
we didn't have those array methods.
So no one thought about that initially,
and they don't wanna change that
implementation because we
want backward compatibility.
So they don't change that part, but
the new part of the DOM API is different.
But we can still wrap it and
modernize that API, that makes sense?
Cool, and now that we have reference and
we will see this in action in a minute,
when we have an element,
using getElementsById,
getElementsByClassName or
any of the options.
We can read and change attributes' values,
read and change styles,
we can hook event listeners to that
element, we can add or remove or
move children, read and change content,
and there are more APIs.
In fact, new W3C APIs sometimes
are adding new properties and
new methods or
new events to those elements.
For example, drag and drop,
drag and drop or multi-touch for
working with an iPad, for
example, or the pointer API,
so you can work with an Apple pencil or
a Samsung pen.
Those APIs are new W3C aspects
that are adding new interfaces,
new methods, new event names,
new properties to these DOM elements.